==========================================
Emptiness Dhamma; and Emptiness Nibbāna 
==========================================

:date: 2019-01-13
:modified: 2019-01-13
:tags: Dhamma Talks by Mogok Sayadaw, Emptiness Dhamma; and Emptiness Nibbāna, Ven. Mogok Sayadaw, Ven. Uttamo, Dhmma Talks
:category: path of nirvana
:summary: Emptiness Dhamma; and Emptiness Nibbāna (Dhamma Talks by Mogok Sayadaw)

Dhamma Talks by Mogok Sayadaw; 11th September 1961

It’s beneficial to listen emptiness (suññatā) dhamma. With emptiness and realize emptiness Nibbāna. This is important. The Buddha taught Mogharāja, if you could see emptiness you would realize Nibbāna. One time Ānanda requested the Buddha to explain the emptiness of the world (suññatā loka). Contemplate a dhamma as empty of I & mine. What are the things to contemplate? Contemplate the eye, form as not I & not mine. With the contact of eye & form, and eye-consciousness arises. This also is not I & not mine. Eye-consciousness and feeling arise by contact (phassa). All three of them also are not I & not mine. If you can contemplate in this way and will be free from the kingdom of death. Today I’ll talk about this short and effective dhamma. Why should I teach emptiness? Because it will disappear with Nibbāna. Even now in this Buddha’s Teaching, it’s nearly disappeared. Talking about mind-body (nāma-rūpa) and people don’t understand it. Because there’s no person or living being. If talk about the 5-aggregates (khandhas) are arising and passing away, only few people want to pay attention to it. Khandha, āyatana (base ~ 6 internal bases & 6-external bases; 6-sense doors & 6-sense objects), element (dhātu) & truth (sacca) are empty phenomena (suññatā dhamma). In the future no one will teach about it. Even find fault with someone who talks about it. In the aggregates there are no I & mine means it’s empty of a person or a living being. The arising and passing away of aggregates are empty of I & mine.

(Here Sayadaw used feeling to teach emptiness) I am in pain is wrong view (diṭṭhi means view, but without adding right or wrong in front of it always means for wrong view). And then it follows by clinging to view (diṭṭhupādāna) and action (kamma). (See the 12-links of Dependent Co-arising). Because of feeling and becomes I feel. The 3-causes for the “future becoming” come into the process (i.e., diṭṭhi, diṭṭhupādāna & kamma). (Because we can’t view it as emptiness. Without emptiness Dependent Arising process is continuous and becoming the round of existence (Saṁsāra). If this dhamma disappears, and the teaching will disappear. Without the penetration of emptiness, I & mine will follow everyone all the time (I is wrong view & mine is craving). It happens because we can’t see emptiness and leads to bad destination (duggati). Someone will say “not I” is a difficult thing. In reality, not I lead to Nibbāna. To Nibbāna you don’t need to choose a place for practice (It can practice anywhere, not the same as samatha practice). I’ll show you the practice. By seeing the feeling is arising and the I concept falls away. By watching and observing of the feeling arising; its life span is only one and two. One is arising and two is passing away. By seeing of passing away, the mine does not exist anymore. By seeing impermanence, both I & mine fall away. In the 31-realms of existence only impermanence exists. Other things are only given names. Feeling only has the job of to feel and not my business.

Insight meditation is the work of watching and observing. Feeling arises and disappears. It disappears because it’s not mine. And then craving has fallen away. Then you know the emptiness of feeling. Contemplative knowledge (ñāṇa) becomes the knowledge of emptiness. Craving is the cause of dukkha and the aggregates. With the truth of dukkha is gone; there is the arising of the Path Knowledge and the ending of dukkha. Therefore, the Buddha said that by arriving to the emptiness so as not to be seen by Death means Nibbāna. Here are the important points to note. By knowing a dhamma is arising and wrong view fall off, and with the passing away craving fall apart. Not realize the first Nibbāna is not understanding of emptiness. Not from book knowledge but by directly. For example, a pleasant feeling arises in the body. By knowing directly of its arising, then the I-ness fall away. It’s not me, just only feeling, and it becomes empty of me. It’s not mine that it passes away.

Therefore, seeing impermanence is without the I-ness & mine-ness. This is the knowledge of emptiness. Contemplate more and more it becomes the Path (magga). The arising is dukkha and the passing away is also dukkha. By fully understanding (pariññeya) of this and then from the insight knowledge it becomes Path knowledge. Then all these arising & passing away come to an end. Dukkha nirodho Nibbānaṁ~ the cessation of dukkha is Nibbāna. Taṇhā nirodho Nibbānaṁ~ the cessation of craving is Nibbāna. The Path knowledge understands dukkha and sees Nibbāna. (With the truth of the path, the other truths are fulfilled. The Commentary gave the simile of a boat carrying people and crossing the river from this shore to the other shore. This side is the truth of dukkha, the river is the cause of dukkha and the other side is the end of dukkha. The boat is the truth of the path which done the other jobs.) Impermanence is the dhamma of not I & not mine. Therefore, by contemplating impermanence, wrong view and craving fall away. Emptiness mainly destroyed wrong view, but also including craving. By seeing the arising of phenomena overcomes the identity view (sakkāya diṭṭhi) & annihilationism (uccheda diṭṭhi). And seeing the passing away overcomes eternalism (sasata diṭṭhi).

------

- `Content <{filename}../publication-of-ven_uttamo%zh.rst#dhmma-talks-by-mogok-sayadaw>`__ of "Dhmma Talks by Mogok Sayadaw"

------

cited from https://mogokdhammatalks.blog/

..
  2018-12-28 ~ 2019-01-10  create rst; post on 01-13