============================================================================
Dealing with Pain in Samādhi Practice (Dhamma Talks by Sayadaw U Candima)
============================================================================

:date: 2022-02-13
:modified: 2022-02-13
:tags: Bhikkhu Uttamo, Sayadaw U Ukkaṭṭha and Sayadaw U Candima, Sayadaw U Candima, A Noble Search
:category: path of nirvana
:summary: Dealing with Pain in Samādhi Practice (Dhamma Talks by Sayadaw U Candima)

 [This is a second talk in samādhi practice and connection with the above talk.] 

 Under Construction!

------

- `Content <{filename}content-of-dhamma-talks-by-candima-sayadaw%zh.rst>`__ of "A Noble Search" (Dhamma Talks by Sayadaw U Candima)

- `Content <{filename}content-of-dhamma-talks-by-ukkattha-and-candima-sayadaw%zh.rst>`__ of Dhamma Talks by Sayadaw U Ukkaṭṭha and Sayadaw U Candima

- `Content <{filename}../publication-of-ven-uttamo%zh.rst>`__ of Publications of Bhikkhu Uttamo

------

**According to the translator—Bhikkhu Uttamo's words, this is strictly for free distribution only, as a gift of Dhamma—Dhamma Dāna. You may re-format, reprint, translate, and redistribute this work in any medium.**

..
  2022-02-13 create rst

  [This is a second talk in samādhi practice and connection with the above talk.]

      After two times of sitting for samādhi, each person is not the same but the dukkha vedanā arise are the same. (?? After sitting in samādhi twice, everyone's experience is different; but the rising of dukkha vedanā is the same. ??) However, the sitting posture may be dukkha vedanā of pains, and aches are the same thing. Here there are two kinds of yogi—someone has the strong five strengths of saddha, sati, viriya, samādhi and puñña, and someone has weak strengths. Even though feelings of dukkha vedanā are the same, someone who has enough strength can send the mind on the meditation object. My instruction is to free you from dukkha. Dukkha is not the teacher who gives you, but already it’s with you (i.e., vedanākkhandha). Therefore, however the practice may be that yogis can’t be free themselves from dukkha. Wherever you keep your mind at the nostril or rising and falling of the abdomen when the khandha is changed (afflicted) dukkha vedanā arise is the same. Mindful of the mind at the object is connecting or applied thought (vitakka)—this is me of the jhanic factors, and keeping the mind on dukkha vedanā is kāma-vitakka and byāpāda vitakka (i.e., sensual thought of not wanting dukkha vedanā and aversion to it.). Keeping the mind on pains, aches and numbness is unwholesome thoughts (vitakka). This unwholesome vitakka and jhanic vitakka are competing with each other. 
  (This point is very good for contemplation. Even though the mind dislikes unpleasantness, still it can’t let go of them. At near death with severe pain and unpleasant mental states of seeing the painful destinations of rebirth signs also can’t let go of them. Some gained jhānas but with severe illness they lost them again. So it is very important to practice how to deal with vedanās—sukha, dukkha and upekkhā vedanās. Vedanās are giving a lot of problems and sufferings to human beings because they get lost in their ignorance and craving.)
  Jhāna—absorption means concentrating one-pointedly (on an object). Concentrating one-pointedly on a meditation object and not letting it fall away from it—is called jhāna. Send the mind to a meditation object is jhanic vitakka and to vedanā is kāma vitakka. So there are two vitakkas (connecting) arising. Every yogi has to encounter these two vitakkas. Could you contemplate insight (vipassanā) if these kāma, byāpāda and vihiṃsā vitakkas (sensual, aversion, harming thoughts) occupy the mind? 
  These three vitakkas are dangerous. In establishing samādhi, you encounter the first danger of disturbance. This is not what the teacher gives you and the dhamma process. To deal with it is to practice Dhamma. If you don’t know the path and the meaning of Dhamma practice, it becomes useless and for pāramī (perfection only). (This is important, as we can see in some Buddhist traditions.)
  Doing the farming is not difficult, but cleaning the field is. To know what one is doing is more important than the practice (This point is related to his own practice) Is there anything more important than to overcome dukkha vedanā in the practice? (This one point is not enough for successful practice. His own biography testified this point without a good teacher (kalyāṇamitta), no Dhamma Knowledge, etc. made him or encountered a lot of difficulties in his practice.) Yogis must encounter jhanic and byāpāda vitakkas. These are jhanic vitakka and unwholesome (akusala) vitakka. Kama vitakka comes to pull the jhanic vitakka. Two vitakkas come and pull the mind. It was like chasing a football, and it’ll get by one who has more strength. 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 50
  Jhanic vitakka sends the mind to the meditation object and kāma vitakka pulls the mind down to the place of pains, aches, and numbness. You must pull the mind toward jhanic vitakka. Sending the mind toward the entrance of the nostril is jhanic vitakka. Reflecting short and long of the breathing is jhanic vicāra (sustaining or sustained thought). Contemplating as isn’t possible with the pain down there is wrong sustained thought (sustaining). [?? Contemplating in this way: that pain below is impossible; for it is wrong sustained thought (sustaining). ??]  There is no jhanic vitakka if you follow the pains and aches, and become unwholesome vitakka. This is not the cause of a teacher and by one’s own cause. You must check your own effort. With no absorption (jhāna), there is no path (magga), i.e., jhānapaccayo and maggapaccayo (jhāna condition and path condition). For the path (magga) you use the jhanic condition (jhānapaccayo). You let the mind concentrate one-pointedly on your meditation objects is jhāna. Jhāna sends the mind to the place where the air and nostril point contact (the other objects also the same way). Send it with faith (saddha—has faith on the practice and oneself). Contemplating with viriya means not letting the mind fall away from the object by giving strength to it. (i.e., connecting and sustaining with strength)
  Here faith—saddha is except this practice there is no other way to free from suffering of death. (?? Here, the faith—saddha is that there is no other way to get rid of the pain of death other than this practice. ??) Even now with this vedanā yogi becomes uncontrollable to his mind and at dying, it will become worse than this situation. If you follow the desire of taṇhā (correct the body), when falling into four woeful existences, it will be more painful than here. So there will be no refuge and reliance for me there, I have to practice with faith—saddha. (?? Therefore, there I will have no refuge and no one to rely on; I must practice with faith—saddha. ??) With strength sends the mind to the object is strength of effort (viriya). [?? Sending the mind to the object with power is the strength of effort (viriya). ??] Staying alert with mindfulness is the strength of mindfulness (sati). 
  If you practice with these three factors, the strength of concentration (samādhi) develops. Send the mind to the primary object with five strengths, you will get it, if not you don’t get it (i.e., samādhi). Do I have strength in the practice? The mind not staying where it has been sent is (?? has ??) no strength and becomes painful. You have to know it. You suffer because of association with unwholesome vitakka (unwholesome dhammas or kilesas are fools. So this is association or consort with the fools). You have to know one’s mistakes. If you really suffer if you send the mind to the meditation object as the teacher told you than (?? , then ??) it’s teacher’s mistake. (?? If you do send your mind to the object of meditation as the teacher says, and it is still really painful; that is the teacher's mistake. ??) If you can’t send the mind, that is your mistake. If you free yourself from these two mistakes, it becomes sukha (instead of dukkha). In Dhamma practice, however the practice may be will encounter dukkha vedanā. (?? In Dhamma practice, no matter what, the practice will likely encounter dukkha vedanā. ??) Vedanā only stops at death. While still alive, you have to live together with this lump of poison. 
  Therefore, the most important thing is you have to deal with it. The Buddha warned us to run away from it. The yogis run with strength. Practicing Dhamma is done with strength. Could you be free from it if you don’t have strength?
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 51
  Ah! It’s painful, and it means you don’t have strength. In regard to worldly matters, let me die never arise to you. (i.e., not resisting to taṇhā), I have to feed it (the body). [?? Regarding worldly things, the thought of letting me die (i.e., not resisting taṇhā) has never appeared to you because you have to feed it (the body). ??] Here we feed the yogis and the floor is carpeted and comfortable. Do you want to be soft? Could you be soft at near death? If you’re in the situation of uncontrollable even for one hour sitting and at near death it’ll worse than that. (?? If you are in an uncontrollable situation even after sitting for only one hour; then it will be worse than that in a situation close to death. ??) Who will have to suffer? You have to know one’s own problems and check your nature. (?? You must understand your own problems and examine your own nature. ??) The Buddha described the process of practice in the Vammika Sutta—the Ant-hill Discourse (Sutta No. 23 / Majjhima Nikāya). 
  The teacher (i.e., the Buddha) asked the student (a monk) to dig up the ant-hill (refer to the body). First, he found out a bar in it (bar refers to ignorance). A house was closed (i.e., doors) by a bar and someone couldn’t enter inside the house (in the same way ignorance prevents people from realizing Nibbāna). He asked him to put the bar away, then continued digging and saw a toad. (toad refers to anger and irritation). After putting it aside and continuing digging, he found a forked path (it refers to doubt; this one is in Burmese translation; in English translation, it’s a fork—a tool). He again put it aside and continued digging, he found out a sieve (representing the five hindrances). He also has to put it away. I’ll stop here; if I follow the sutta it will become long. [?? I'll leave it at that; if you follow the sutta (scriptures), it gets long. ??] 
    (In the sutta: continued with the digging, he found out the following things: 
  a tortoise—refers to the five clinging aggregates—five khandhas; 
  a butcher’s knife and block—represents the five cords of sensual pleasure; 
  the piece of meat—a symbol for delight and lust; 
  A Naga serpent—a symbol for arahant.)
  Here the teacher was the Buddha or meditation teacher and the student was a bhikkhu or yogi. The ant-hill is yogi’s khandha, an ant-hill referred to the physical body. At day this body is burning with lobha, dosa and moha fires. The bar is avijjā. In the world, there are millions of people, but they don’t know the Four Noble Truths. They don’t know the Dhamma way and can’t practice freeing from saṁsāra. Therefore, avijjā is like a bar that closes the door to Nibbāna. Now, the yogis here know the way of freedom from saṁsāra is like put away avijjā—ignorance (i.e. listening of Dhamma or study of Dhamma). Yogi practicing of Dhamma (?? practicing Dhamma ??) is moved the bar away. During the practice, yogi encounters the toad which is like anger and irritation. This is referred to as dukkha vedanā. Whatever method or system we use and have to encounter it.
  (The Inn Gu Sayadaw and Sayadaw U Candima—their practices and explanations of the process were quite similar to this Vammika Sutta process. Some teachers of dry insight also gave talks in this sutta explained with their practice. There are some differences. This sutta seems to be the practice process only related to arahantship.)
  Wherever you’re practicing, either in the forest or on the sofa the body is always with you. Do the four elements not change or disturb? In the Āsīvisopama sutta, it shows the four vipers and here with the toad (dosa). 
  The four great elements are disturbed or changed, and the mind becomes domanassa (aversion, irritation, etc.) Without knowing these things, people (only some) are teaching Dhamma. Some teachers asked students to contemplate anicca, dukkha, anatta; but they didn’t know why doing it. The teacher has to explain the beginning, the middle and the end. 
  (This point is very important. Sayadaw emphasized this point strongly to find out the right way in his own practice. He made a lot of trials, which wasted a lot of time and energy. (?? Sayadaw strongly emphasized this point and wasted a lot of time and effort doing many experiments in order to find the right method in his own practice. ??)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 52
  Usually, teachers are only giving instructions on systems or methods of the practice. Mogok Sayādawgyi was exceptional. Therefore, Sayādawgyi’s Dhamma talks are Dhamma treasures for all yogis whatever their traditions are). 
  Do you all know where to start the insight practice (vipassanā)? 
  Starting to encounter dukkha vedanā is the beginning of Dhamma practice. With the great four elements being disturbed or afflicted, dosa arises. Practice to free from abhijjhādomanassa (desire and displeasure) is the first practice. 
  With regard to strip off vedanā—there are three kinds of sukha, dukkha and upekkhā vedanās. Sukha vedanā (pleasant feeling) is related to the realms of humans and heavenly beings who are enjoying sensual pleasures (kāmaguṇa). Dukkha vedanā (painful feeling) is the four woeful realms (apāya-bhūmi) and no happiness at all, they are living with dukkha. Upekkhā vedanā (neutral feeling) is the realm of absorption (jhāna-bhūmi). Therefore, these are similar to the three realms of existence. 
  First we have to practice freeing ourselves from dugati-bhūmi—painful realms (hells, animals, ghosts, titans). Dugati-bhūmi comes from painful feelings. 
  Dukkha vedanā came from the four great elements. It created or gave anger (dosa) and unwholesome (akusala) dhamma. At near death beings can shun away from the four senses of the door of eye, ear, nose and tongue, but they can’t escape from the body door. With the disturbance or affliction of the four great elements, yogi first has to encounter dukkha vedanā. I’ll show you a very beautiful heavenly nymph and your eye is looking at her. And then with a thorn pokes into the other eye. (??I’ll show you a very beautiful celestial fairy, and your eyes are looking at her. Then that is poked with a thorn into the other eye. ??)
  Does the eye (the good one) stay with the celestial nymph or move to the afflicted eye? Therefore, between pleasant and painful feelings where the mind will incline? 
  Between these two vedanā, dukkha vedanā will dominate the mind. Therefore, the Buddha taught abandoning dosa—the toad first. The Buddha didn’t talk without any reason. This is the khandha process. In Dhamma practice, you can’t practice by overpassing the process. 
  [i.e., without samādhi power practice insight. Some systems can be exceptions; for example the Mahasi system—the whole-process represents sīla, samādhi and pañña. Mindfulness process is from the coarser objects of the body to gradually leading to refined objects of dhammas. 
  Some years ago, I met a Mahasi yogi in Burma. With the Mahasi system he has already discerned aniccas, but I didn’t know what was the reason he went to a well known meditation center which taught a different system. The teacher there gave him the meditation of the four great elements. Later what happened to his practice I didn’t know. The right advice should be to ask him to go back to practicing the Mahasi system with a good teacher.]
  When the poison of the four great snakes arises, there is the feeling of dosa which doesn’t want to experience it. How to deal with it is the beginning of the practice. Then how to do with it? To deal with it with the five factors of absorption (the five jhānaṅga). We send the mind to the tip of the nostril, and it becomes the five factors of absorption. Does it arrive there every time you send it? 
  Does it now fall down? (i.e, toward the pain) Don’t you pull it up again? It doesn’t stabilize and falls down again. It happens going up and down. For going up, you have to put effort. When it falls down there, are you with it? So who is pulling it down there? This problem arises.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 53
  We must solve this problem. This mind is free if it has not been pulled down there. If you want to free this mind, it needs to dig out the root of the pulling element. It becomes free if you can easily put or keep it on the top of the head and abdomen (i.e., U Ba Khin and Mahasi system). Now can you keep it there? 
  (I have already mentioned some Burmese Systems before. The ways of practice are different. For most people to develop samādhi it takes time. If your practice under U Candima is his center, it is a different thing.)
  The pulling element arises, the enemy is there! In sitting meditation, you find out the enemy. If it is your own mind, you can keep it anywhere you like (So mind is anatta and not atta). Now, can you do it? This khandha is not only with one’s own desire, and there is still another one with it. There is another thing sends it toward badness. You have to level out long and short, slow and fast breathing when you send the mind to the tip of the nose. You take the strength at the chest area. Keeping the body in a suitable way (i.e. without any tension, relaxed and natural, you can sit longer). Some yogis are stretching their upper backs of the body. This is a danger. You have to change it. I’ll not allow lifting the waist and stretch the back. Later in the practice, you can’t do anything with it. 
  If you make the strength like a runner, you can’t continue it. The mind is in the state of the kāma mind process. Instead of becoming the path mind process, if it becomes a kāma mind process, you can’t realize path and fruit (magga and phala). 
  It’s anti-path and fruit. Clinging the object with kāma is only the kāma mind process—kāma-citta vīthi. (His interpretation of Dhamma and usages are different from others.) The kāma mind process is covered with lobha, dosa and moha. Therefore, don’t control the kāma body (rūpa) with the mind by erecting it. If you do it in a normal way, the body will calm down. So you don’t need to be concerned and look after it.
  The reason you can’t send the mind to the tip of the nostril is (when pain increases) with fear and control of the khandha (body). Then it becomes a lump of dukkha, so you get only dukkha (i.e., resist the pain with force). You can’t get sukha by doing it. Now, you are going and looking at the pain, aches and numbness below (yogi has to neglect about it or not concerning it. Later we’ll have a reflection on pain by other teachers). Do you not suffer by looking at it? This is saṁyojana—fetters—dukkha fetter; fetter of view, this is the clinging fetter of “my body”, “my body”. Does it give you dukkha or sukha? “Dukkha, Venerable Sir” (a yogi’s response). Instead of abandoning the diṭṭhi fetter, you’re sticking with it. You’re with this diṭṭhi for a long time of beginningless saṁsāra. You have tried hard to abandon it. Furthermore, you contemplate the touching point as like seeing with the mind when the air is touching with the tip of the nostril.
  In contemplating the rising and falling of the abdomen, the yogi knows the arising and falling. He contemplates the nature of the arising of form with noting as like seeing with ñāṇa. If the falling of form arises, contemplate the nature of falling with noting as seeing with the mind. In this way, contemplating with strength and systematically is possible to achieve it. 
  (Here we have to know the practical nature of the Mahāsi system. Rising and falling of the abdomen is a primary object, but not as a basic object to develop jhāna samādhi. The yogi has to contemplate whatever arising at the present without missing any object—even painful sensations until it subsides. And then continue with the contemplation, whatever is distinct for him at the present moment.)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 54
  Every time the sensation at the toop of head arising if the yogi can contemplate with the 5 strengths and it’s also possible. (Here also we hve to know the nature of practice in U Bakhin or Goenkaji or Anagam Saya-Thet’s system. The sensations on head is not their basic object for developing samadhi – i.e., upacara-samadhi as mentioned by the commentary. Only the yogi attains samadhi doing the scanning of sensations in the whole body start from the head. One time I had a strange experience with a sensation on the head. One day I was lying down on the bed and watching the breaths. After sometimes there was a strong sensation arose at the center of the head. It was like with an iron drill drilling into the head. It was not painful but I was surprised and my hand went there and touching the place This was clinging to the head with ditthi – my head. Mogok Sayadawji in one of his talks mentioned as followed. In day time there are many people and sounds and voices around you. You’re also busy. At that timeyou can’t hear oridinary sounds. But after mid-night a small lizard falls from a ceiling to the floor. It makes a loud “thud” sound and you hear it very clear. The mind becomes quiet has this power.
  We-bu Sayadawji’s meditation instruction is very simple and direct. He oly taught one Dhamma, not complicated as most teachings which are developing jhanas and using abhidhamma teachings for insight. He asked or taught people to observe the sensations arising when the air of in breath and out breath touch the tip of the nostril – in all postures. According to Sayadawji if your Samadhi develops, you’ll see or discern anicca there. Later the whole body will show its true nature also. U Ba Khin’s teaching was confirmed by We-bu Sayadawji and Anagam SayaThet’s teaching was confirmed by Le-di Sayadaw.
  So what are the differences among these systems or methods? From the arising of the abdomen to the falling if it the yogi has to wait for it. And then the mind runs toward dukkha vedana. You have to wait from falling to rising again that the ind not staying at it and moving toward dukkha vedana (because pain is ore coarser and distinct than sensation of rising and falling of the abdomen). It’s more easier falling on to dukkha vedana that rising and falling object needs more effort. It does not mean it’s impossible but it needs more effort to do it. When contemplating the preceding mind with the following mind (i.e., maggangas) the mind moves to vedana (if vedana arises). Knowing of pain, aches, numbness of the ind arises. Contemplate anicca (rise and fall) of the knowing mind. Contemplate the impermanence of whatever arising mind. You must able to contemplate it. If you have the strength it’s possible. 
  In ānāpāna kamatham the touching points are close to each others. Also the knowing minds (contemplative minds) are near each others that there is no free time to delay. So it’s easy to overcome pains. Therefore I choose this kamatham (the main point here is this system is Thae Inn Gu method – the way of strong breathings). 
  Other kamathams are also not wrong. It’s unnecessary for argument on your kamatham or my kamatham is right. When vedana arising unwholesome dhammas of tanha, mana, ditthi sink the mind in the mud. We use the 5 strengths to pull it out.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 55
  We contemplate the meditation object not only with faith saddha, mindfulness-sati, effort-viriya, samadhi and discernment-panna of the 5 strengths but also with the 5 jhanic factors-vitakka, vicara, piti, sukha and ekaggata (connecting, sustaining, rapture, pleasure and one pointedness). If you relaxing the mind and it’ll move to vedana. 
  Could you relax it at near death? To develop the mind freer from vedana (pain) by adjusting short and long breaths at the tip of the nostril. When practicing you have to exhort yourself with the frightened mind and doing the practice blindly lead to failure. Even though now you don’t free from vedana later you’ll free from it for sure. U Zin (i.e., himself) gives you the guarantee. I’ll send you or show you to the place where it is free by giving of my time. 
  [This is not an exaggeration. Later one of his tacks on interview with yogis – including a nun, a woman and aman discussed their experiences with him. They overcame the pains and gained samadhi. I gave the title for it as -= with samadhi overcome the hindrances. Here the yogis could sit for 2 hours and 3 hours at a time .They gained samadhi – some had skeletons as nimitta (mental sign); some 32 parts of the body and some had discerned the 4 great elements (these were the majority). For yogis had bones nimitta with samadhi power by contemplating its nature and overcame wrong view, craving with hatred. Now it became vipassana. It was very similar to the Thai forest tradition which developed jhanas and after came out from samadhi contemplated dhammas – such as, 4 elements, 32-parts of the body (asubha), skeleton, etc. 
  U Candima’s systems are more akin to Thai than Burmese. He rejected some Burmese systems or practices as not really vipassana. Some Thai forest monks also view on some Burmese vipassana practices as in the same way. 
  It seems to be there are 2 ways of development in vipassana practice. 
  Some Buddhists even go to extreme to say that commentaries, Abhidhamma and vipassana without jhana samadhi are not authentic. True without jhana there is no realization. In every realization (the 4 stages) there are vipassana jhanas. 
  There were many evidences in the suttas many people without any jhana practices by listening the Buddha’s teachings realized Dhamma – as e.g. Santati minister, suramutta – the drunkard, suppabuddha – the leper, some citizens, even sensual devatas (not include brainach-gods).
  Some well-known Burmese Sayadaws like Ledi Sayadow, Mogok Sayadaw, Mahasi Sayadaw, etc. were not ordinary monks and very good pali scholars and practicing monks. Actually other people teachings and practices are right or wrong is not important, what importance is one’s own knowledge and one’s own practice.]
  I want you all have the strength to pull the mind out from the kilesa mind. I am training you to have the strength to bear dukkha vedana and to pull yourself out from it. It’s like kneading a dough. In making bread by mixing the flour with water and knead it until becomes dough. During its kneading you can’t do it in a comfortable manner. To become a thick and sticky dough you have to use strength. It is better to become a thick and sticky dough. For 3 o 4 days are like kneading the flour with water and can’t take comfort in doing it. It’s not yet arriving to the stage of making the cake of vipassana. All of your minds are very coarse with lobha, dosa and moha. Ultimate reality – paramata mind and body (form-rupa) are very refined that you can’t work with this coarse or rough mind. We’re making our minds (contemplative minds) to become refined. Now we’re doing the sitting an hour each for 5 times. Later we’ll practice 2 hours for each sitting. 
  Yogis who want to practice with my meditation (ānāpānasati) adjust the short and long breathings, and keeping your mind toward you. After nine days and you can stay as your wishes.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Manuscript P. 56
  Anyone who gives up the effort only end up with loss and at dying will not easy to die. If you now pushing away the teacher’s welcoming hand to save you and at dying will have an ugly face to die. Now, this kind of vedana is not killing you, it’s just a little bit only. You have to practice to keep the mind to be freed, and to keep the momentary happiness aside. We do the in and out breathing like seeing with the mind at the touching point. If we breathe as the same as the machine then don’t incline the mind toward the machine. Only to be aware the sound coming toward you and adjust your breath as the same to the sound. If you are able to do it then don’t pay attention to the sound. You only adjust your short and long breathings to become equally. The mind gradually arriving to the jhanic process and you don’t want to come out from it. From onward I’ll only explain its nature.
  